The intravalley spinpolarized superconductivity in rhombohedral tetralayer graphene has been discovered experimentally in Han et al arXiv:2408. 15233. Despite the absence of Fermi surface nesting, we show that the super Conductivity appears near the Van Hove singularity. Superconductivity is one of the most important and intriguing quantum phenomena in condensed matter and material physics. We discuss the possible pairing mechanisms and point out that the KohnLuttinger mechanism is a plausible explanation for the intravalley spinpolarized superconductivity in the rhombohedral tetralayer graphene. Graphene multilayers are promising systems for studying unconventional SC because of the ability to control the electronic band structures through the displacement field and the lower disorder nature. A recent rhombo- hedral tetralayer graphene experiment discovers a novel timereversal broken SC. The existence of SC from intravalley pairing is also highly nontrivial. The trigonal warping in graphene multilay- ers generically results in noncircular Fermi surfaces. In this Letter, we study the possible SC arising from a spinpolarized valleypolarizing normal state in the rhom- bohedral stacked tetralayer graphene. We have used 2×106 kpoints and assumed spin and valley polarization in( c) -( f) . arXiv:2409. 06701v1 [condmat. suprcon] 10 Sep 20242. We identify the “magic condition” that favors in- travalley SC without Fermi surface nesting. Then, we construct a minimal toy model that describes the intravalley spin- polarized pairing with an odd angular momentum. For the hwave case, we find a h+ihchiral topological SC of class D, simi- lar to the pwave case. Finally, we discuss possible mi mi doping. Singleparticle model. — We study the rhombohedral tetralayer graphene( i. e. , with a chiral ABCA stacking pattern [56]) . The singleparticle Hamiltonian of valley τKand spin scan be described by ˆH( τ, s) 0=X kΨ†( k) ˅h( τ) ( k) Ψ( k), ( 1) where k=( kx, ky) is the 2D wave vector relative to the valley wave vector τK. The electrondoped band structure is sensitive to the value of ∆ 1. layers, described by a single parameter. As shown in Fig. 1( b) , the electron band bot- tom can become extremely flat for∆ 1=60 meV. With a more careful analysis, we find that the flattest band, defined by the largest density of states( DOS) , is around ∆1= 67 meV, corresponding to a bifurcation point of the VHS peaks. Pairing interaction. — We are interested in pairing within the same valley and the same spin. In the presence of a large |∆1|, the layer and sublattice are also polarized. In our convention, the lowenergy electrondoped band is polarized to the 4B site. We consider the + Kvalley and up spin without loss of generality.  Computation with the general Vk, k′is challenging. A very fine kmesh is required for describing the details of VHS. We consider a simplified pair- ing interaction that depends only on the relative angle between kandk′and decompose the pairing interaction in terms of Fourier harmonics. The simplified interaction allows a very efficient formulation for the nu- merical computation of the transition temperature Tc. In our calculations, we treat the values of g1, g3, and g5as tunable parameters and focus on general features of the superconducting states. The singleband projection onto the lowenergy electron band is also performed. A Landau theory is constructed by3 perturbing the ordering parameter. For a given pairing channel l, the Landau free energy density is expressed by F A. In Eq. ( 5) , the summationP′ kis over half of the kmesh withk= 0 excluded. The linearized gap equation can be obtained by the vanishing quadratic term. In the case of doubly de- generate solutions, we need to analyze the O( ∆4) part of Eq., as we will discuss in the pwave case later. We aim to investigate the conditions of realizing an intravalley spintriplet SC based on our mini- mal model. In our model, gl’s are treated as free parameters. We focus on the pwave( l= 1) , fwave( 3) , and hwave( 5) pairing channels. The angular momentum mixing pairing( such as p+f) will not be discussed. The positivity of u′( T) favors a formation of a chiral pwave order, realizing a 2D topological superconductor of class D. This state is distinct from the conventional p+ip SC because the Cooper pairs from intravalley pairing carry finite momenta, making it a PDW with the FuldeFerrel-like planewave order. In Fig. 1( d) , we plot Tcof the p+ipSC as functions of the doping density neand ∆ 1forg1= 160 meV·nm2. We find that the peak of Tcfollows the VHS, and the maximal Tchappens close to the largest density of states location. Interestingly, the fading of Tc at the boundary of superconducting dome is quite sharp, different from intervalley SC. We find that the Tcis identical for all oddlthat is not divisible by 3. This hidden symmetry is likely an artifact of our simplified interaction. The resulting super- conducting state is topologically trivial but breaks both timereversal and inversion symmetries. In Fig. 1( e) , we plot Tcof the nodal fwave SC as functions of the doping density neand ∆ 1forg3= 135 meV·nm2. Similar to the pwave case, the peak of Tc follows the VHS, and the maximal Tcis near the bifur- cation point of VHS peaks at 67 meV. We show that the linearized gap equation of the pwave case at a fixed µyields a threshold value of glbelow which SC is completely suppressed. The existence of a threshold for realizing SC explains the narrowness and sharp termination in the SC region, con- FIG. 3. We construct and analyze a minimal model for the intravalley spinpolarized SC. We aim to understand the unconventional SC in the electrondoped rhombohedral tetralayer graphene. The threshold value is nonuniversal, depending on the model parameters. The intravalley SC is most favorable near the VHS, with the maximal Tc found near the bifurcation point of VHS peaks. The resulting SC requires a finite coupling strength, resulting in narrow superconducting regions. We conclude this Letter by discussing the possible pair- ing mechanisms in the experiment. First, the con- ventional phononmediated pairings [27, 28, 30, 36] are irrelevant as an anisotropic pairing interaction is required for an intravalley spinpolarized SC. In the experiment, the max- imalTcis found in the device without any WSe 2, and the device with W Se 2proximate to the electron band yields the weakest SC. The correlation between W se 2andTc suggest a possible repulsioninduced mechanism. We investigate the screened Coulomb interaction with RPA in the spirit of the KohnLuttinger mechanism. Using a small kmesh and averaging overk, k′on a circle, we obtain a dominant pwave pair- ing interaction with g1 of order of 100 meV. Using the model discussed in this Letter, a chrial topologicalp+ipSC is realized with a maximal Tcof order of 0. 1 K. The interaction deserves a separate detailed investigation in order to decisively establish whether a KohnLuttinger mechanism arising from the screened Coulomb interac- tion is indeed operational here. Our work provides a simple systematic way for understanding the intravalley spinpolarized SC, which should motivate future experimental and theoretical studies.